This is the backup paper card.
This is Bill Rees.
Is that Siebert sale made for you?
I mean, is this something that... Well, it's made for me in the sense that it's happening.
It's not made for me in the sense that I would have loved to have bought the books before they went to auction.
I mean, I knew Siebert very well, and I sold him a lot of, I mean, most of the expensive things he bought in the last decade came from me.
So you had a sense of the collection then?
Oh, I had a very good sense of the collection.
I'll show you what Sievert, Sievert, you know, Sievert was not the recluse that he's been painted as.
He was really, I think the real reason why
people in the book world felt that way.
It was really, in many ways, his collecting had slowed down terrifically.
I think partially for financial reasons, a lot of financial reasons.
You know, he had limited income in his retirement.
Book prices had gotten a lot higher.
And like a lot of collectors who've been in the field for a very long time, he had a hard time coping with the fact that books that he paid
Ten bucks were going for a thousand.
So, all those things had slowed him down.
But his real interest was linguistics in the latter part of his life.
He was very involved in Indian history in Maine.
The dictionary and something like that.
I have both of these in general.
I don't know if you have this.
This is the obit that Ives Goddard, who's the head linguist at the Smithsonian.
did for Frank in Anthropology Journal.
Can I get a copy?
They didn't have that.
And it's really, I mean, I think.
Bill?
Yes?
John Clare is about to alarm.
Where were we?
Well, here's a piece of the Banker Daily News.
They had a huge takeout on Seabird.
It's almost humble in part because, well, anyway, spent the last 30 years of his life
I guess they say he was meticulous in his collecting, but he was, I guess, rather disheveled in his... Well, he was certainly, yeah, he was very disheveled.
He took the looking like a bad man in the latter part of his life, but... But they said nobody really knew about the collection in this piece, and that's really not the case.
Yeah, that's not the case at all.
I mean, various people have said, well, nobody knew about the collection.
I think it was really more an issue that, in the book world, Frank outlived his generation.
All of the dealers, when he was an active collector, as Bailey Bishop said in the introduction of the First Cadillac, he bought very widely, bought from kind of the whole spectrum of people who were dealing in this stuff.
He was a very well-known figure in the book world.
And as you'll see, Ives talks a lot more about his personal life than other people do.
He went through this marriage that didn't last very long, and at the end of it, he really had something of a breakdown.
I mean, he moved to Philadelphia.
He moved into kind of a seedy hotel where he basically lived for four years.
And he quit medical work, although in his later years, he was involved with the hospitals up there, because when I talked to him, he'd tell me that he'd been at the hospital doing volunteer work and stuff like that.
And then he moved up to Old Town, Maine.
So the point when, and that put financial constraints on him because of child support and alimony things.
So the point in the 60s when all that happened also corresponded when prices were really taking off.
So he was not that active as a book buyer, kind of from the Streeter sale on.
He only bought five things at the Streeter sale.
I mean, it's a place where you would have thought he would have been very active.
And in fact, he bought some great books there.
I mean, one of the greatest books
In part two of the sale, Lederer's Virginia book, which is a lot of 553, is the most expensive thing you bought at the street or sale, and it's going to be one of the best books in part two.
But all those people who dealt with it, you know, the Eberstotz, Decker, Roland Tree, Stevens, you know, the whole Mike Walsh of Good Speeds, Good Speeds itself,
disappeared over the next period of time, and basically the people he was really in touch with were Bailey Bishop, who had known him from when Bailey had gone to work at Good Speeds, which was probably the biggest single supplier to him.
Me, because I knew about him by reputation and got in touch with him.
So you found him?
Yeah, and I developed a friendship with him, and Clarence Wolfe of McManus, because
Probably the person that Frank respected most in the book world was Edwin Wolfe, Clarence's cousin, who was the long-time head of the library company, who he was very close friends with.
So Clarence had known him, you know, forever because of that.
Plus the Philly connection.
And the Philly connection, exactly.
So, I mean, I would say the three of us were the ones that were still in touch with him, and in fact at his funeral, besides his immediate
family the only people who went were bailey and clarence who acted as the fall bearers and the only reason i didn't go was i was out of the country but i mean that we were the only people who showed up well you certainly knew about his death did you try to make an attempt to try and do a well private uh the fan you know i think bailey bailey really had the inside track frank had indicated through his family they should talk to bailey bailey was the bookseller that
He had known the longest, who was still around.
I think he had a lot of faith in Bailey, justifiably.
And he told his daughters to, you know, to go to Bailey for help, which they did.
And I tried to persuade Bailey that it would be a good idea to sell me the collection, and Bailey decided to go the auction route.
And I can't blame him for doing that.
Woulda, coulda, shoulda, but, I mean, it's close to six million for part one.
Who knows?
I mean, is part two as strong as part one?
Yeah, I think, you know, they tried to divide it pretty evenly by both size and dollar amounts.
Would you have been prepared to make an offer of five or six million for the equation?
Certainly.
And that's something you would have worked at to... I mean, we're leading into something.
How many booksellers today would be?
prepared to do that kind of a preemptive thing?
Well, probably not that many.
I mean, in the end, this auction has behaved, I guess, it's both predictable and unpredictable what's happened.
It's predictable in the sense that this is ideal situation.
You have a great collection that's been off the market for, you know, decades.
with a collector who's got a great story, whether people really knew him, the way people knew Bradley Martin, or whether he wasn't generally known, but known to the cognizant, like Siebert.
And then you put it all together, and you've got this fabulous stuff, and it's, you know, it's a recipe for people going crazy.
And so, you know, the prices have been realized at this auction that I don't think anybody could have gotten in.
cold blood.
I mean, if I had said to some of my customers who ended up being buyers here, I've got whatever, you know, let's say the Champlain, and it's $400,000, before this sale, I think people would have said, you're nuts.
And I think there are other instances of that in this sale.
You know, the Smith New England at $211,000, which is what it comes to with a hammer.
That's something that was at yours, and there's something you
No, Dick Arkway bought that.
But I don't think anybody, before the sale, I don't think you could have gotten anybody to pay that.
And I mean, it's one of the disadvantages that booksellers struggle with in the modern times, is being able to compete with the auction houses, both as marketers and in terms of being able to secure collections.
Because if a bookseller's going to get a collection, he's got to be willing to come up with the money.
And an auction house doesn't have to necessarily come up with the money.
That's right.
They might have worked something here as they did.
They certainly, here in this case, I mean, Sotheby's, I believe, I don't know this for sure, but I believe advanced the family money to pay the estate taxes.
But, you know, with the books of security, it was a pretty safe bet.
I mean, to get the garden, I forget what it is, I'll have to read my own book, but to get the garden sale, they, I think, wrote out a check for $8 million.
Yeah.
And I don't know what it was here, but here there was that situation.
I don't know the details of the estate other than the books, but I doubt if he had a great deal of liquid funds.
Certainly not enough to pay the taxes on what the appraisal of the collection was.
The appraisal of the collection was basically roughly what the high estimates are.
And so it was appraised, I think,
properly appraised at, you know, five and a half to six million.
So did you make an offer on that, just out of curiosity?
Well, I never really was in a position to.
I solicited being able to make an offer, and the decision had already been made, basically, to go to auction, and the decision had been made to go to either Sotheby's or Christie's.
No, you, I think, you mentioned to me that you accounted for perhaps 60 percent of the action at the first?
Yeah, just about in dollar terms.
I mean, in a sense, it was more than that, because I bought, um, 230 lots of that abouts.
So I bought a little less than half, well, no, it was more than that.
I bought 246 lots, but that was less than half the lots, more than half the value.
It was close to 60% of the value.
But I underbid another 100 lots.
So, in that sense, I was the price maker for two-thirds of the sale, because, uh,
underbidders, as the auction houses will tell you, are just as important as bidders.
That's the whole point of an auction.
Two people want something that only one of them can have, you know?
Yeah.
So, by no means, I mean, it's always interesting, especially when you're in the middle of it, the mythology that gets created around one of these things.
I mean, one of the myths that got created that Arthur Freeman told me about in London, I guess the next week at the London Book Fair, was that I had
bought every lot I bid on, that I'd been utterly invincible.
You know, I stuck my hand up, I didn't stop.
And that wasn't the case at all.
I mean, out of, maybe, I was underbidder on another hundred, and then I had, I literally had a bid written down on every lot.
I mean, sometimes those bids I just knew weren't going to work.
Every lot?
So you prepared to bid on every lot?
I was prepared to bid on every lot.
I mean, in many instances, I knew that there was no point.
But just as an exercise, I did have a bid on every lot.
How much were you prepared to spend of the sale?
I mean, maybe you don't want to tell me that, but did you have a dollar figure in your head that you could handle?
Well, I did.
I mean, really it was a matter of whatever it took.
I mean, I'd known the sale was coming for a long time.
A lot of my bidding was for clients, so I was spending their money, not mine.
That's the question.
And where I was bidding for stock,
You know, I knew that I wasn't going to be successful all the time, or necessarily even the majority of the time.
So, and I'd been kind of saving up for this for some time.
I knew it was coming.
So I was pretty much prepared to do whatever I had to do.
In the end, given the competition, it was very difficult to buy for stock.
I mean, most of the prices were retail or full retail or beyond full retail.
I didn't ultimately spend that much for stock.
Is it possible today for a bookseller of your stature to buy for stock on the scale, say, that Rosenbach did that?
Well, I think it is.
I mean, if you look at the history of Rosenbach's deal, you'll see that he very seldom actually went out and bought those collections.
He almost always worked out some kind of deal.
And this is the kind of thing that was going through my mind.
where he went to his best customers and to some degree involved them in the deal.
He said, look, I've got, I mean, if you look at the great collections he bought in the 20s, he almost always did this.
He'd go to Frank Ultschall or he'd go to, you know, some of his Philadelphia guys and he'd say, Bill Elkins, who is his friend and customer for a long time, say, look, I can buy this, it'll cost me X, you know,
you'll get first choice, you know, the prices will be somewhat better for you, and he didn't, he financed many of the deals that way.
I mean, Rosenbach's goal, and I guess my goal whenever I bought a big collection, was see how quickly you get your money back, and then take it easy.
And that sort of, you know, Roterer or something like that, I mean, he really did that with Ultschul.
He managed to buy the collection, Ultschul bought the majority of it, he ran around like mad, sold enough to
cover the cost.
He was out of it, and then it was after that the gates came down.
Suddenly it was like, well, he took his time, you know.
Marked it up.
For this particular section of the book, I interviewed Tentcher in Switzerland last year before.
I think it was two years ago.
He says that he has perhaps 25 or 30 testaments that he's in business serving.
And, you know, I don't know how it's usually.
He said he does
dollars a year.
Of course, we're talking manuscripts now.
But basically, when you go into a sale like this, are you, I mean, I don't know how many customers you have, and I know you've got a very active website, but are you going into one of these things with the sense that you're buying for years?
You're serving a fine core of clients?
Well, sure.
I mean, in this case, I was bidding for about
20 different people or places, ranging from a single book, a single inexpensive book, to one private individual that was the biggest single buyer in the wholesale, in dollar terms.
So I was really covered in the waterfront there.
I mean, in that sense, I worked with my customers about what they were interested in, what fit with their collections,
how much they were going to bid.
In bidding for stock or buying for stock, wherever you're buying, one's constantly thinking that.
I mean, if you see an important thing and you know already where to sell it, you know who wants it, you can operate on a thinner margin, obviously.
You can make it because you know you can buy it here, sell it there.
You don't need to make as much money.
as if you're buying it just basically on speculation.
It's just going into stock, and you don't know when you're going to sell it.
But by having these commissions beforehand, it does give you the security of knowing that you've already made your nut, so to speak, on part of this sale, and you can shoot the dice on a couple of the others.
Sure.
I mean, there's... Yeah, that's true.
That's true.
You know, I mean, it's...
This is not the kind of thing I'll ever use.
I'm just curious.
Well, I mean, sales like this are a double-edged sword for somebody like me in the long run because, you know, it uses up a lot of customers' money.
And that's what auctions always have on us.
They're time-sensitive events.
They're going to happen.
You've got to be there.
You've got to do it.
And if it's a book you're not going to see again, there's no hemming or hawing.
You're going to put up or shut up.
And so, you know, in several...
three of my best customers are going to have spent their budgets for the year on this sale, and they're not going to have bought any books from me.
And they're going to have bought books that I just assumed would have bought and sold to them.
So, in that sense, these things are terrible.
I mean, I don't particularly want them to go spend all their money with some of these.
But they're not terrible.
This is, I mean, you'd have to agree this is, and this is probably how I'm going to use this, how this sale will fit into my discussion of you.
I'll go over your quotes with you, if you'd like that.
I'm happy to do that, by the way.
I'm happy to do it.
The other side of a sale like this is obviously it's a very important sale to me, in the sense that this is the greatest sale in my field since Screeter.
It's a great landmark sale, and so it becomes an opportunity for me to demonstrate that I'm the dominant figure in the field.
Well, I think we can even take it to a higher level.
We're going in the next set of questions, but would you say this is the last great book sale of the 20th century?
Time's running out, I think.
Well, I mean, it's a fairly... This breaks perfectly for me.
I'll come to the next session, by the way.
Well, I think it is, yeah.
Like the garden sale was the last sale of the Red Hut, White Hut 80s.
Yeah.
Because it happened to be November.
I mean, I don't know what they got there.
Personally, to me, the 20th century ends not in a couple months, but in 15 months.
That's right.
Well, that's right.
Exactly.
I mean, there's nothing else like this on the calendar this year.
I can't see where they're going to pull out anything out of their hat.
But, you know, I don't know.
Well, I think I'd say you're right, because the last great sale of the 90s, that would handle it.
Other things are possible.
Something like the Wentworth sale of last year is not something I would have known about.
and seemed coming the way I knew about this one.
Yeah.
Just as an aside, I'll show you.
This is a typical Siebert correspondence here.
Let's see if we can find a good one.
Are these letters?
Yeah, these are Siebert letters.
And I noticed that they're written on legal pads.
They're generally written, rather, ad infinitum.
They generally touch on...
any number of topics, especially political ones.
Frank was kind of an unreconstructed.
Frank was actually a libertarian of, well, there's a typical Siebert letter.
He was a libertarian, basically, but he thought the world had started to go to hell with FDR, who he always referred to as old jelly legs.
So this is as recent as September 4, 1992.
Yeah.
I mean, I really got, you know, as we got to be good friends, I started to, he was out of touch with what was going on,
And so I found I could get him going on topics.
I would write him and, you know, I'd say, you know, what did you do with the holiday sale or something like that.
And, you know, I'd get back these wonderful letters.
And every time I wrote a catalog, practically, I'd get a letter from him analyzing the catalog.
He'd love to do that.
Is this a sale?
I don't know if that's... Yeah, it's probably a sale.
But he'll, you know, he'll go through...
you know, remarking on... Well, he starts.
I'm quite sick of crooks, lions, and greed.
In fact, I'm fed up with the great society, the medical profession, the politicians, and all the bullshit I see.
Right.
I think that few people realize the enormity of the... It must be... Is that the nadir or the media, do you think?
The nadir, I would think, yeah.
That covers...
the situation.
Or maybe it's the media.
It sounds like it's from the context.
The context is just media, but the media in the country and the world.
He goes on, I don't want to vote for either of the jackasses running for president.
I'm sorry, Ross Perot dropped out.
I think his real reason was that he decided the finances of the U.S.
He goes on about politics here.
Now to America.
And then he goes here.
There are some points that he's discussing.
Three, four, five, six,
So then on page three, he goes to lots of the sale.
Actually, on this page, in your catalog 112, I already have a lot five.
Oh, okay, well, he loves to do this.
He'll go through my catalogs, and then he'll say, well, my copy is, you know, he'll describe what his copy's like, which, of course, is inevitably better than what I'm offering for sale, and he inevitably bought for nothing where I want, you know,
And who's underlining in red?
Is that you?
No, that's him.
That's him.
That's another aspect of cybercorrespondence is the red ink for emphasis.
Here's an example.
I have a perfect copy and an imperfect duplicate of the 1742 Indian Treaty, a conference held at the Fort at St.
George's.
It's apostrophe as Evans 41976, Depew, P-U-I 20.
My imperfect has the
first dupuis dupuis has the first leaf worn with some minor defects and a few letters missing uncut and the last signature photo set why was he he mentions michael zinman michael our friend michael zinman wanted it for his imperfect collection of evans items and gave me a range so michael know him too obviously yeah a range of his estimates of value i accepted his lower figure um so yeah you sold michael's imperfect one michael's fine actually i bought the i bought the
The other went for Yale at the sale.
So, he clearly, quality conditioned matter to this guy.
Oh, absolutely, yeah.
And yet he's making no provisions for the disposition.
No, I mean... I wonder why that is.
Well, I don't think... Frank absolutely hated the institutions.
And while he liked some of the people running the institutions, like Ed Rolton, you know, he liked a lot.
There were librarians he liked individually.
But in his view, he had collected, the heyday of his collecting had been in a great period of major institutional growth and acquisition.
And he viewed it that he'd been kept from getting all these things he wanted because of the institutions.
And so he thought of them as his enemies.
And then they went away, and they never came back on the market.
It would get him spluttering mad to even think about it, and there were some librarians who he particularly felt had, you know, stolen stuff out from under his nose.
That was one thing.
The other thing was one of his best collecting friends was a guy named Robert Decker, who was a Philadelphia collector who gave his Americana collection to Penn.
And there's a Deckard room at Penn, who also, by the way, his home was later bought by Graham Rader in his Valley Domingo, which was Graham's original place, the King of Prussia.
And Deckard had been a very good friend of Frank's, and he felt that Penn had treated the collection very badly.
They dispersed it within their other collections.
They hadn't properly memorialized Deckard and so forth.
And he would always bring that up as an example of what happened if you gave a collection of an institution that the institution wouldn't treat it right.
And toward the end, you know, it was also a very touchy topic with him about his books, as it is with anybody, because he clearly wasn't going to part with it until he was dead.
There's no question about that.
So discussing the future of his collection with him,
which I dared to do a couple times, was a little bit like saying, well, when are you planning to die, Frank?
It's like bringing it up with Bill Scheide, do it at your peril.
Yeah, and, of course, with Scheide, it's kind of much more established.
We all understand what's happening.
Yeah, exactly, and he likes to, you know, keep it.
He hasn't quite done it yet.
You know, I'm not dead yet, but you know what's really going to go on.
But with Siebert, he hated the thought of it going to a collateral institution.
He hated the thought of booksellers, even booksellers he liked, getting their hands on it, and I think he hated the thought of other people getting their hands on his books.
He, at one point, talked to me about setting up an independent library, and I, you know, said that Franklin's just
I mean, you're going to have to have a serious endowment, you've got to have a program, you've got a great collection, but it is what it is.
It's a rare book collection without any resources to back it up.
You know, it would only last a matter of time, and then it would collapse.
I, you know, he was a member of the Antiquarian Society, which I'm on the board of, and AAS didn't have a lot of books there.
I urged him to think about AAS.
I don't know if he ever really seriously did or not.
I think basically you just put it off and put it off, and in the end did nothing.
Well, because there's a couple of kids, is that right?
Two daughters, yeah.
So they're the beneficiaries of this thing.
Yeah, yeah.
How do you feel?
I was at this little thing last night.
I talked to Lou Weinstein.
And you can talk, never mind Lou, but Lou will say this.
I'll say Bill Reese.
He'll say the bookseller of his generation, you know?
How do you respond, and this is not just Bill, but you hear this throughout your profession.
How do you respond when you... You mean me?
Yeah, when you hear yourself being described as the bookseller of your generation.
You're what, 42, 43 now?
44.
Well, it's very flattering.
I mean, I don't... It's very flattering.
I don't really know how you can respond to something like that.
But why do you suppose they say that?
I mean, I think it has to be more than the net, let's put it that way.
It has to be more than the action that's going through the place.
Well, I think... I think that you're a scholar, you bring some scholarly... I mean, we've tried to, you know, we've tried to produce things that are, you know, that are done in a scholarly way.
You know, my colleague
You know, I think booksellers appreciate scholarship as much as anybody.
As you know, there are a lot of, you know, kind of former academics, and, you know, there are a lot of very scholarly people in this business, and I certainly don't think of myself as the most scholarly person in this business by any means.
Who would you nominate?
Oh, somebody like Fred Schreiber.
You'd have to run Barney Rosenthal.
I'd have to give you those, too.
know uh guys like that i mean i i am within my field which is americana um but uh i mean there are other people who in their fields i think are jonathan hill in jonathan's field who i think are you know doing what i am doing um but you know i think i have successfully combined the scholarship
of the book business and being a salesperson and selling the material, and convincing people of the interest of the material.
And, of course, that is something I'd like to discuss.
I mean, the role of the bookseller, Roger Stoddard says everything he's learned, he's learned from booksellers.
Interesting.
And he named them, you know, for the years.
And he says, talk to the booksellers.
They come in and they explain to me why something is really important.
They've really done the work.
Fred Schreiber says the same thing.
Can you speak, address yourself to the function, the role of the bookseller?
Well, yeah, I can very much.
You know, I mean, I really had two mentors when I was an undergraduate at Yale.
One was Archie Hanna, who was the curator of West Virginia Americana, a great guy.
And the other was Manning Charles Montgomery, who was at one time the director of Winter Tour.
and then came to Yale after he left winter tour as a professor of American art.
He was a chaired professor at Yale.
He'd never gone to college.
Charles Montgomery graduate from high school.
And if you know anybody who was interested in American decorative arts, I'll tell you, this man was one of the great figures in the field of American decorative arts.
And Charles started off as a dealer.
He was a furniture dealer.
And ultimately, Henry Francis Dupont hired
Charles, because he was so good, and because Charles really put together a lot of winter tours the way it is now, assembling the period rooms, doing all those things.
By the time I knew him, I mean, he was just an extraordinary figure.
And I think that his ability came from his experience as a dealer, because, and this is what I would argue with him about, because, you know,
I went into the business when I was in college, and he was annoyed at me.
He thought I should have been more of a scholar.
He said, it's like getting married when you're 18 years old, he said.
But I said, well, look where you came from, because I would see people in graduate programs, so let's say in the American Decorative Arts, which I was quite involved with at that point.
And, you know, they were working at the best places, Yale, the Metropolitan, Chipstone out in Minnesota and Wisconsin, rather, winter tour.
They were looking at the best of the best.
They were surrounded by the top 99.5 and up percentile of material.
And the same is true of people who get trained in the big rare book libraries.
You know, they're living, the people who have the best academic access to rare books are living in a very rarefied world.
I live between paper mania and scrounging around, you know, trying to
find things in postcard bins and things like the seabird sale.
And the best dealers I know in the business are people who have had that kind of range in their career, where they've gone from dealing with basically crap to dealing with the best stuff.
So when they see the best stuff, it hits them between the eyes.
And this was what always struck me about Montgomery.
He dealt with that kind of range of material.
The people who are going to graduate school and getting trained in an academic sense
knew the greatest stuff, but it didn't jump out and hit them.
And it didn't have the context that a dealer, an experienced dealer gets, from wading through basically oceans of junk to get to the great stuff.
Zinbin's rule, you know, looking at the post-it, you've got to handle this stuff.
That's right.
The critical mess.
Theory absolutely applies.
And you handle tons of stuff, and then when you see a gem, or you build up that kind of layers and depth of experience, I think that's what makes great book dealers.
And I think it's why book dealers can explain things to people.
They have that kind of context.
Right.
You have to see it.
Do you see it instantly?
I mean, when you see something great, does it stick out more?
Well, these days, of course, if it doesn't jump out of me, I don't know it, do I?
But I like to think that it does.
But does it happen to you often?
I mean, that you see this... Oh, yeah.
Yeah, it does.
It does.
But, you know, serendipity is...
always an important element in this.
Serendipity is a word that Horace Walpole came up with, and as you know, it's not just chance, but it's chance defined by knowledge and experience.
And so I certainly find time and time again, I'll learn about something, some thing, some area, and it's amazing how quickly that piece of information will be useful, how quickly that'll pop up in my past.
Do you have a good example you can say?
Any good examples?
Yeah, let's see if I can think of a good example.
We can come back to it.
I'm interested also in, you know, I've seen your undergraduate thesis.
Michael has a copy of it.
I mean, you're a kid.
As a kid, I mean, you seem to have known that you want to be a bookseller.
Well, I knew I wanted to work with books, yeah.
What was your major at Yale?
I was a history major.
I actually had a practical use for history major.
But I wasn't sure what context I wanted to work with books, really, until I was in college.
I mean, I knew I wanted to work in books.
I knew I wanted to work in Americana, whether that was in an academic setting.
Now, where does this come from?
I read briefly about your background in Italian countries piece in February, but I still don't get where this great enthusiasm for books.
Yeah, I'm not really sure myself.
I mean, my first real interest stemmed from Audubon.
I was very interested in Audubon.
My father had had autobons back in the 30s, but my father didn't have any money back in the 30s.
He had sold them.
Yeah, he owned a bunch.
At one point, he owned like 30, and he sold them for like $10 apiece.
But we had a couple hanging in the house.
I was very interested in ornithology, and I was fascinated by these autobons.
My father just wasn't interested in them.
My father worked for Coca-Cola for many years.
He started a lot of Coca-Cola bottling plants in all kinds of places.
By this point, he was a gentleman farmer.
And so I got very interested in autobot, which he was interested in.
And so we started going places to look at autobots together, a place like the Old Print Shop, Ken Newman's Old Print Shop.
I mean, I've known him since I was, I guess, 10.
The first time I went in there with my father,
And, you know, my father, I had, what I did with my father, I didn't do little league.
My father and I went to art museums together.
And my father gave great interest in this, although they weren't really collected.
Neither of my parents were really collected.
And I grew up in a house full of books, although neither of my parents were any such book collectors.
There were just a lot of books around to read.
And so reading was a big thing in my family and an important thing.
You know, if you wanted books to read, you know, that was...
You know, my mother would get the books.
So I grew up in a literate context.
There was antiquarian impulse or anything like that.
Not particularly, but, you know, I mean, that really was where my interest came from.
And I've got to say, I look back very fondly on that period because art museums weren't nearly as popular then as they are now.
I mean, I grew up in Maryland, and my father and I used to go down to Washington all the time.
and we'd go to the National Art Gallery, we'd drive in on a Saturday morning.
You could always, we'd get there when it opened, and you could park at a parking meter on the mall.
No parking meters left on the mall.
You could park right there, there's nobody in the place.
It was wonderful.
Yeah, you'd go around, nobody'd bother you looking at the pictures.
Now it's, you know, a massive art mall experience.
So I started going to bookstores with him.
I got more and more interested in books.
met people, you know, I mean, Clarence Wolfe, you know, probably since I was 13 from going in there.
So I was really very interested in it and very involved with it.
And one, I mean, Yale was a place where I have a big family legacy.
A lot of, you know, ancestors went to Yale, so in that sense, if I'd gone somewhere else, I would have annoyed a lot of people.
But the real reason I picked Yale over Harvard, where I could have gone,
was that, uh, was the Rear Book Library.
I know Roger would like to hear that, but... Oh, I'm so afraid.
Um, but, uh... His jaw drops.
That's not exactly a Trump-Liver collection up there.
No, it's not.
It's not.
But, um, you know, the Beinecke is a, is a much more accessible institution than the Houghton is.
And, of course, Americana is a strength here.
Yeah, Americana is a strength here, which is not, I mean, nothing, not something they've never done.
Yeah.
Um, although they've got a lot of
Nothing like here.
So really, in the end, to me, it was a choice of rare book line for everyone.
I've never heard of an undergraduate making that statement, you know?
And once I was here as an undergraduate, there were very many... You were the first undergraduate I've ever met entering a college who was making a selection on the strength of the rare book collection.
And there were very few undergraduates who were that involved.
So, I mean, that was a tremendous help for me, because...
And, you know, once I got to know people like Fritz Liebert and Archie and Don Gallop, who, you know, I took the bibliography from, who were giants in their field, and I was one of the only undergraduates, you know, who was really involved and so forth, and that was a huge leg up for me.
And did you start off immediately as a first-year student going into the Beinecke?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And how did you feel having access to these?
I felt great.
I mean, I went over here and looked at books all the time.
And they really do.
I mean, this is a university, so it's great graduate schools.
I'm really impressed also when I see places like Princeton, you know, which really doesn't have a great graduate program.
You know, they build these special collections with undergraduates in mind.
Yeah.
supportive of the undergraduates coming in and using these things.
Well, Ralph Franklin has really made huge strides in this, I think.
I mean, Beinecke is very, very much a teaching institution now.
They've got classes there all the time.
Right now, they've been able to, you know, they're vast underground complexes under the streets over there.
And what used to be the annex, the Sterling Library, has now been taken over by Beinecke.
You're going to give them a lot more static space.
They're putting in compact shelving.
And so they've taken the top level of one old book stack underground and are putting in a 75-seat lecture hall and two more seminar rooms.
Right now, the seminar rooms there are jammed.
I mean, there are so many courses being taught in Beinecke, using Beinecke materials.
Undergraduate level?
Undergraduate and graduate level.
They've started a series of what they call master classes for graduate students, not necessarily Yale from all over, just on the use of materials and research.
It's a program that Ralph has gotten going.
But lots of undergraduate classes are meeting there and using Beineken materials in the class, and they're really actively trying to expand that.
So that, I think, is just a terrific aspect of what they're doing.
So when does this start to nucleate?
You're here as a freshman.
You're enjoying the Beineken collections enormously.
Well, it's really, you know, I got to be quite good friends with Archie Hanna because that was
At that point, Western American history was my chief interest, and Yale had a great collection of Western Americana, and Archie was a famous figure, and Archie's just a wonderful man.
I mean, he was still happily around and doing very well.
He was on the board of the Goddard Library, which, so I know him.
Sure, of course, yeah.
And, well, of course, the collection he gave the Goddard Library really, he did the work, and after he retired, he had office space with us.
wrote the bibliography of the social novels and so Archie started to introduce me to a lot of people and through him I met Peter Decker who was Archie's best bookseller friend and Archie and Peter used to go on trips every summer together and Peter would usually write up little books about them about their trip and in fact one of the last trips that Peter did because Peter was already in his
I guess about 80 at that point.
Peter, back in 1928, wrote a biography of Benedict Arnold.
And Peter always wanted to recreate Arnold's March on Quebec.
And so on the 200th anniversary of it, in 1976, Archie and Peter and I drove over the Arnold route from Kennebunkport,
through the Maine wilderness up to back and back, which was a lot of fun.
I have somewhere another picture of myself and Peter in the backwoods of Maine.
Pretty funny, because Peter's about 5'2", and I'm 6'3".
But through Peter is really how I ended up in the book business, because an old customer of Peter's died and left this huge collection to his cousin.
who was his nearest relative, who wanted nothing to do with the stuff, wanted it out of the house.
And where was the question?
In Summit, New Jersey.
And the house was worth a lot of money.
It was a big old house.
And the cousin had decided, for no reason I could tell, that she wanted $40,000 for the books.
And I went over there with Peter, and it was just obvious that, you know, even to what I knew then, that this was an incredible story.
Was it an Americana?
Yeah, it was Western Americana, Civil War material.
mainly Western, so good stuff.
Good stuff, yeah, a lot of great stuff.
And Peter said, you know, this is an incredible deal.
You know, he said, I'm 82.
I don't know, I'm not going to mess with this, but... He was 82 at the point.
Yeah.
And Peter would be almost 96, and he was really pretty hale and hearty to the end.
And so I went to my parents and said, you know, I want to borrow the money to buy this and go into the book business.
I was still planning to go to school, I thought.
And what year are you in, though, sophomore year?
I was a sophomore, yeah.
Wow.
And so I talked to them doing that.
And how old were you?
20, 19?
19, yeah.
And the year was about, what, 71 or 18?
75, spring of 1975.
And what year did you graduate?
77.
77, okay.
This is important stuff.
The details are very important.
So I bought the books, and there's 20 tons of books.
Where did you take them?
Where did you move them?
You were living here in New Haven, your home's down in Maryland.
Yeah, and to complicate matters, when I first did this, I was working with a friend of mine named Fred White, who's now dead, who's a Texas bookseller.
So, some of the books were in Texas, some of the books were here.
You know, it's kind of, I was... Were you anxious about this?
Were you nervous?
Did you feel that maybe you were a bit too...
No, because as I said earlier in the conversation, once you get the money back, I was able to get the money back within six months.
Really?
So by the end of that summer, that happened in the spring, by the end of that summer, I paid my parents back.
And how much of the stock did you have left?
Oh, most of it.
I mean, it was an unparalleled learning experience, because one of the hardest things to do in the book business is to buy.
Right.
It's relatively easy to figure out what the best books are, and it's relatively easy to figure out what's great condition, what's not great condition.
What's not easy is to figure out how to buy something at a price that you can make a profit on.
And in this case, I had a lot of room for error, because once I got the cost out, I really couldn't go wrong.
And I certainly sold some things probably too cheaply.
In a way, it was so what?
Can you think of a high spot out of that collection, that sprints tonight?
One of my favorite things in that collection was the uncle of the guy, who's this collection, a guy named Melvin Nichols, and his uncle was a guy named Martin Garretson.
And Martin Garretson was the authority on the American Buffalo.
He wrote kind of the classic, but still on the classic books, the American Bison.
And he'd been very active in the movement to save the bison.
And, you know, Garrison had been, like, out in the West as a kid in the 1870s and 80s.
He ended up as curator in the Museum of Heads and Horns at the New York Zoological Garden, as it was then called.
And Garrison's whole collection had gone to Nichols.
Well, Garrison, in the, I guess, around the turn of the century,
had a long correspondence about Bison with Charles Goodnight, Colonel Charles Goodnight.
And Goodnight's, you know, this great figure in Western ranching history, and it was kind of a... If you see the stuff, by the way, he has to return.
Yeah, I think he says, we'll do that in a couple of minutes.
The constant touchpoint for Larry McMurtry, if you've read any of McMurtry's books, is, you know, it's Old Man Goodnight.
Here were all these wonderful letters from Goodnight, who, you know, had as much experience on the plains with Buffalo as anybody, about his experiences trying to breed cattle and bison.
Do you mind if I snap a couple of pictures of Buffalo?
Not at all.
But that was just, you know, that was a great thing.
I mean, the most amazing thing about the Nichols books were when Peter and I went over to look at the collection, you know, we didn't have that much time.
We went through things quickly.
There was a library room that was maybe twice as big as this room that was lined with bookshelves.
There was, you know, there were books all over the house.
Once we'd done the deal and we started to pack up, I hired a whole bunch of friends of mine from Yale to go over and pack this thing up and load up this, you know, band.
Not band, but it was like an 18-wheeler.
We discovered that all the main room, the whole library, was double-shelled.
Wow.
Which I hadn't realized when I bought the books.
Every shelf in my house is double-shelled.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, I might have guessed, but they had glass-front bookcases.
You know, it wasn't easy to get into them.
You know, it turned out there were twice as many books in there.
The other great bunch of stuff, the Nichols stuff, was that his
His next-door neighbor, when he grew up, was a guy named Charles Francis Bates.
Charles Francis Bates was the son of Agnes Bates, who was Elizabeth Custer's best friend.
Agnes Bates was also a widow, a 7th Cavalry widow.
Her husband was killed a little bit more.
Mrs. Custer and she lay about houses next to each other in Bronxville.
Charles Francis Bates grew up running into Mrs. Custer's house.
She got into West Point.
ultimately left the army and became a lawyer.
And when people started writing, you know, kind of nasty revisionist books about Custer in the 20s, like Frederick Vanderwater's Glory Hunter and books like that, he became the main flat catcher.
He'd go out and write articles attacking the people who wrote the revisionist books and say, well, Mrs. Custer ended up leaving him her library.
So there were all these books there from Mrs. Custer's library, books inscribed into Mrs. Custer, you know, Tending on the Plains, inscribed into Mrs. Custer.
They're wonderful Custer stuff.
Colonel Custer's necktie, which is a great, you know, one of those great unprovable artifacts, you know, a little red bow necktie, said they were going to Custer.
I'm interested also in how a bookseller helps institutions
build their collections.
I know you've done a lot of work with institutions.
I mean, you have private collectors you work with.
Do you have any thoughts on how you've worked with various institutions to help them?
Well, I think, as you certainly know, with all the time you spend in the book world, I mean, this business has gotten more and more specialized.
And the specialist bookseller and the institutions that are interested in whatever particular areas are going to have a natural affinity
for each other.
So the collection, the institutions that really collect strongly in the fields where I'm strong, I tend to know, I tend to have a pretty good sense of what they have, what they're trying to build, what their strengths are, where they want to fill in cracks, things like that.
I think that's the main thing, that there's a collegial feeling that I have, and I think most of my colleagues have,
with the people who are the specialists in their field.
And so, obviously I'm trying to sell books, but I'm also thinking, well, you know, who does this fit with the best if I get a piece?
Can you think of some people in the academic world who you've worked with who I might ask a comment about their relationship, their professional relationship?
Well, I mean, I've got
Contacts in the academic world and contacts in the library world.
I mean, as a collector, I've had probably more contacts with the academic world, because with Melville, for instance, where I have probably the best collection of private hands.
And this is your collection?
Yeah.
Oh, see, we haven't even talked about Bill Reese's objective.
You know, lots and lots of Melville scholars have come here and used my materials.
Can you briefly describe the collection?
Well, what I have that's most significant, I think, are books from Melville's library.
There are two main institutional collections, both of which stem immediately from the family.
I'm just going to turn this on the other side.
It's getting too close.